---
layout: post
title: Fosdem 2017
---

This trip to [FOSDEM](www.fosdem.org) was my second year attending, my first being last year. This year was different though, we had come to FOSDEM as a group of 14 thanks to 
[AberCompSoc](abercompsoc.github.io) who organised the trip. After a long journey which started Thursday evening, getting the train overnight to Manchester Airport and flying out Friday at 6pm. We spent
the Friday enjoying Brussels, seeing the Grand Place and enjoying local Belgian foods (Waffles) despite being exhausted. After checking into our Hotel, I decided that I would not
attend the famous FOSDEM beer night in Delirium Cafe, primarily due to my lack of sleep, I decided to get an early night.

## Saturday
The first day of the conference was great, I managed to attend some really interesting talks and more importantly, collect a large amount of free stickers. I attended various talks 
throughout the day however my two favourite talks were "It's time for datetime" and "Open Smart Grid Platform Presentation". I'll start with my thoughts on the datetime talk. This talk
was given by Mario Corchero who is a Senior Software Engineer at Bloomberg LP, the talk was informative, entertaining and quite broad. The talk covered common pitfalls people come across
while using datetime such as not including timezone data which results in the datetime object being unable to be directly map to a Unix timestamp. The talk also discussed the benefits
and problems that come with the UTC time standard. This was quite interesting as it lead in to why using a library to handle dates is so important and highlights issues most people
would usually overlook when they think about handling dates such as leap seconds as part of the UTC standard. The Smart Grid talk came as quite a surprise to me as this talk was given
by two developers of a Smart Grid system at a Dutch Energy company, I was quite surprised that a business would agree to open source a project developped internally which could give
them a competitive advantage. 

## Sunday
On Sunday, I attended a talk on Khartis, a project started by a French research university ([Sciences Po](http://www.sciencespo.fr/)), created with the purpose of simplifying the creation
of thematic maps. Khartis allows users to select a data file and create a customised map inside the browser, all of the work being done locally. This allows for the project to run in
browser or in an application window via NodeJs. This project was really interesting and really well designed, I don't have much need for thematic maps but I would definitely use
this if I did.

I attended various lightning talks (brief, 15 minute talks on a variety of open source projects) throughout the day while I waited for the larger talks I was interested in. One of these talks
was the Electron talk, which was very popular and could've done with a larger room. This talk was quite interesting despite the lack of depth on the subject. The talk discussed the various
advantages of electron and where it could be used. It also discussed the very clear problem with file sizes, a small packaged application ran up a file size of 100MB which was clearly a 
problem. Hopefully this can be ironned out in future updates to the fast moving project. I'll be watching the project to see how it improves over the next few years or even months.
Another talk I really enjoyed was the Using Linux in Air Traffic Control talk which was given by Gerolf Ziegenhain who is responsible for the Linux and Hardware Plattform at DFS (Deutsche Flugsicherung GmbH)
who are responsible for air traffic control in Germany. The talk covered the problems encountered when working with such safety critical environments, trying to replace outdated
systems with more modern open source systems. A problem often encountered is the 8 year turn around for software releases, ensuring thorough testing and meeting requirements set by the QA
department. The talk gave a surprising insight into a world of safety critical work using open source software.

## Clean-up
Volunteering to help clean up is always an interesting experience, seeing how the whole event is managed and thrown together on the Friday for the weekend, just to be packed up 
Sunday evening. From the hundreds of metres of cat-5e cable cable tied up on the Friday evening to set up the networks used to support the thousands of attendees throughout the weekend, to
the signs, tables and banners placed all across the ULB campus. The whole event is set up by around 10-15 staff and a few hundred volunteers who help with various things across the weekend.
While packing up anyone is free to take the temporary ethernet cables wired across campus for personal use, a great way to get some reasonably long ethernet cables if you're happy to 
crimp the RJ45 connectors on yourself. 

While clearing up you get to experience the community behind this amazing conference, helping pack all of the equipment away, sweep all the halls and rooms used and also throw away all the
waste collected throughout the weekend, including all of the cat-5e cables. The evening finishes with a buffet of foods, ranging from waffles and sandwiches to pumpkin soup, provided by
the staff at FOSDEM, it's a great end to the weekend getting to talk to all the other volunteers and discuss feedback for next year. I had a great time at FOSDEM this year and I'll
definitely be back next year. 